Add the KQIR intro blog post (#223)
apache/kvrocks-website: blog/2024-06-02-kqir-query-engine/index.md

Reviewer: We should include a section or paragraph to discuss about the compliance issue.

It can be simple but RediSearch and other Redis Stack features are commercial and released under a proprietary license. We should convince our users that our implementation is only compatible with its interface but totally made brand-new and no license issues.

Author: Added.

---
slug: kqir-query-engine
title: "KQIR: a query engine for Apache Kvrocks that supports both SQL and RediSearch queries"
authors: [twice]
---

## Intro

TL;DR:

> ![ftsearch-demo](./images/ftsearch-demo.png)

Reviewer: How do you prepare the demo data? I suppose a full (self-contain) example helps and can be explored more smoothly.

As a reader, I don't know the real data stored and thus can hardly understand these commands but only new syntax supported.

Author: The full demo is in the "Try it!" section (i.e. the last section).

Reviewer: Then we can add a link to guide users there if one would like to see the full demo.

Author: Good idea!

Author: done

Pretty cool, right? Let's dive in!

<!--truncate-->

### Apache Kvrocks

[Apache Kvrocks](https://kvrocks.apache.org/) is a [Redis](https://redis.io/)-compatible database built on [RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org/).

It supports [the RESP protocol](https://redis.io/docs/latest/develop/reference/protocol-spec/) (version 2 and 3) and [a wide range of Redis commands](/docs/supported-commands), encompassing core data structures like Strings, Sets, Hashes, Sorted Sets, Stream, GEO, as well as Lua Scripts, Transactions, [Functions](https://redis.io/docs/latest/develop/interact/programmability/functions-intro/) and even [BloomFilter](https://redis.io/docs/latest/develop/data-types/probabilistic/bloom-filter/), [JSON](https://redis.io/docs/latest/develop/data-types/json/) from the Redis Stack.

Unlike Redis which stores data in memory, Kvrocks persists data on disk for improved storage capabilities without being constrained by machine memory limit.

### The capability to query

> In recent decades, NoSQL databases have gained prominence over traditional databases for their superior performance, scalability, and versatility across various industries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In recent years, NoSQL databases have become more popular than traditional databases because they perform better, scale easily, and are more flexible for different industries.
```

Ditto. Use simple words.

> However, many users are reluctant to completely forego the essential features of SQL databases just for performance reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, many users are unwilling to abandon the essential features of SQL databases just for performance reasons.
```

Use simple words.

These include ACID transactions, expressive query capabilities inherent in SQL, as well as optimization and abstraction possibilities offered by structured data and relational algebra.
Consequently, a new category of databases known as NewSQL has emerged gradually.

Kvrocks is a NoSQL database.
While not classified as NewSQL, Kvrocks aims to strike a balance between NoSQL and NewSQL paradigms:

> It endeavors to uphold the high performance associated with NoSQL while bolstering transactional guarantees alongside supporting more expressive query methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It aims to maintain the high performance of NoSQL while also implementing transaction guarantees and supporting more complex queries.
```

In fact, it is Redis moving closer to SQL databases:
RediSearch enables users to create structured schemas on existing Redis JSON or HASH data for index building.
Its schema supports [various field types](https://redis.io/docs/latest/develop/interact/search-and-query/basic-constructs/field-and-type-options/) such as numeric, tag, geo, text, and vector - the latter two are utilized for full-text and vector searches.
Instead of SQL support, RediSearch provides [a unique query syntax](https://redis.io/docs/latest/develop/interact/search-and-query/advanced-concepts/query_syntax/) known as the RediSearch query language.

RediSearch finds applications in various fields.
One recent application involves utilizing its vector search feature to develop retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). For instance, [LangChain](https://www.langchain.com/) utilizes Redis as one of its vector database.
If Kvrocks can be compatible with RediSearch, it could benefit from these ecosystem from RediSearch.

### SQL?

RediSearch uses a unique syntax for queries, but there are some issues to consider:

> Firstly, RediSearch's schema (known as an index created with `FT.CREATE`) can be likened to a table in an SQL database. Its query syntax also aligns semantically with SQL queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, RediSearch's schema (an index created with `FT.CREATE`) can be regarded as a table in an SQL database. Its query syntax also aligns semantically with SQL queries.
```

> Given this similarity, supporting SQL should not pose significant challenges; why not incorporate it?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given this similarity, supporting SQL should not increase significant challenges; why not include SQL support together?
```

> Secondly, SQL enjoys broader usage and is familiar to more individuals. It is simpler to grasp and learn at the syntax level. While developers may need time to understand RediSearch query syntax when using it, adapting to a new SQL database typically requires less effort. Furthermore, SQL offers robust support for various query features, enhanced expressive capabilities (like JOINs, subqueries, aggregation), and greater scalability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Secondly, SQL enjoys broader usage and is familiar to more individuals. It is simpler to learn at the syntax level. While developers may need time to understand RediSearch query syntax, adapting to a new SQL database often requires less effort. Furthermore, SQL offers robust support for various query features, enhanced expressive capabilities (like JOINs, subqueries, aggregations), and greater scalability.
```

> Secondly, SQL enjoys broader usage and is familiar to more individuals. It is simpler to grasp and learn at the syntax level. While developers may need time to understand RediSearch query syntax when using it, adapting to a new SQL database typically requires less effort. Furthermore, SQL offers robust support for various query features, enhanced expressive capabilities (like JOINs, subqueries, aggregation), and greater scalability.

Reviewer: > greater scalability

How?

Author: Hmm seems just a random word, removed.

> Lastly, RediSearch query syntax exhibits certain idiosyncratic designs and historical influences. For instance, the operator precedence of AND and OR (represented by space and `|` operator in RediSearch queries) varies across different dialect versions (dialect 1 vs dialect 2). These design choices might lead users to place more trust in established query languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, RediSearch query syntax suffers from some historical designs. For example, the operator precedence of AND and OR (represented by space and `|` operator in RediSearch queries) varies across different dialect versions (dialect 1 vs. dialect 2). This tribal knowledge might lead users to prefer established query languages.
```

> Lastly, RediSearch query syntax exhibits certain idiosyncratic designs and historical influences. For instance, the operator precedence of AND and OR (represented by space and `|` operator in RediSearch queries) varies across different dialect versions (dialect 1 vs dialect 2). These design choices might lead users to place more trust in established query languages.

Reviewer: > dialect 1 vs. dialect 2

Can we have a link here? If we have a reference to showcase the difference, it would be more convincing.

Author: link added.

> Considering these factors leads us to believe that incorporating support for SQL as a querying language would also be advantageous.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To sum up, we believe that supporting SQL as a querying language would be a good decision.
```

## How we support both?

![KQIR](./images/KQIR.png)

To introduce SQL capability to Kvrocks, we need to design a robust architecture with scalability, maintainability, and strong query planning and optimization features.

We plan to accomplish this through [KQIR](https://github.com/apache/kvrocks/tree/unstable/src/search). In the context of Kvrocks, KQIR stands for both:
1. The complete query engine, covering frontend language parsing, query optimization and execution, etc.
2. An intermediate language (IR) that traverses the entire query engine.

### KQIR: a multiple-level IR

> To support both SQL and RediSearch queries simultaneously, an intermediate language is needed to handle them consistently in subsequent processes without concern for the user's input language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To support both SQL and RediSearch queries, an intermediate language (IR) is necessary to handle them consistently in subsequent processes without concern for the user's input language.
```

- expression passes for optimizing logical expressions like `AND`, `OR`, `NOT` operators;
- numeric passes for optimizing numerical comparisons with an interval analysis (i.e. analyze the mathematical properties of numerical comparisons in terms of intervals) to enhance query optimization by eliminating unnecessary comparisons or improving comparison expressions;
- planning passes for converting syntactical IR to planning IR and enhancing query plans through a cost model that selects optimal indexes and removes unnecessary sortings.

Pass execution order is controlled by the pass manager.
A pass may run multiple times at different stages to simplify individual passes by combining them.

### Plan Executor

The KQIR plan executor is built on the Volcano model.

Once the IR optimizer finishes all optimizations, the resulting IR becomes a planning IR. This will then be passed to the plan executor to create execution logic based on certain context corresponding to the plan operator.

Subsequently, Kvrocks retrieves query results through iterative execution.

### On-disk indexing

Unlike Redis, which stores index data in memory, Kvrocks requires the construction of indexes on the disk.

> This means that for any field type (e.g. tag, numeric), we need an encoding to reduce such index to rocksdb key-values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that for any field type (e.g. tag, numeric), we need an encoding to reduce such index to RocksDB's key-values.
```

Furthermore, we incrementally create indexes before and after JSON or HASH commands getting executed to guarantee that query results are in real-time.

## Current status

The KQIR functionality is currently available on the `unstable` branch, supporting commands like `FT.CREATE`, `FT.SEARCH`, and `FT.SEARCHSQL` (an extension for running SQL queries) to encourage user to test.

However, as KQIR is still in early development, compatibility cannot be guaranteed and many features remain incomplete.

> Thus the upcoming release (version 2.9.0) will not include any KQIR component.

Author: Because KQIR's transaction support is very poor, users may encounter some very strange problems when querying (such as consistency issues), and there are many error conditions that I have not considered at present, which may make users have a bad impression of KQIR.
I hope to wait a little longer before releasing it.

### Supported field types

Currently, we only support two field types: tag and numeric.

Tag fields label each data record with multiple tags for filtering in queries.
And numeric fields hold numerical data within double-precision floating-point ranges. They allow sorting and filtering by specific numerical ranges.

In the future, we plan to expand support to include vector search and full-text search capabilities alongside other field types.

### Transaction guarantees

Currently, the transaction guarantee of KQIR is weak, which may lead to unexpected issues during use.

[Another project in the Kvrocks community](https://github.com/apache/kvrocks/issues/2331) aims to enhance Kvrocks' transaction support by establishing a structured framework.
We will leverage these efforts to uphold the ACID properties of KQIR and release an official version incorporating KQIR after that.

### Limitation on IR optimizer

> Currently, KQIR needs to enhance the optimization implementation of plan operators such as `Sort`.

Reviewer: What does this sentence mean?

Author: rewritten.

Furthermore, KQIR does not currently utilize optimizations based on runtime statistics.
Our future focus will be on integrating runtime statistics into the cost model for more precise index selection.

### Relationship with other features

KQIR integrates well with the [namespace](https://kvrocks.apache.org/docs/namespace) feature.
Any index created is restricted to the current namespace and cannot be accessed in other namespaces, aligning with how other data is accessed within the namespace.

> Currently, KQIR cannot be enabled in the [cluster mode](https://kvrocks.apache.org/docs/cluster).

Reviewer: Do we have a plan to support this? Or it's theoretically impossible. I believe many users use Kvrocks in cluster mode and would like to know the answer.

Author: It may not be supported in the short term, but I think it is possible. I added a paragraph to describe it.

### High experimental!

The current implementation of KQIR is in its early experimental stage.

> As we do not guarantee compatibility and there may be unexpected errors, we advise users against using it in a production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We advise users to consider carefully when using KQIR functionalities in a production environment, as we do not guarantee compatibility, and there may be unexpected errors.
```

Reviewer: We should encourage usage while keeping altering the instability. It's unreasonable to prevent users from using it.

Author: Got it.

## Future outlook

KQIR is currently in development, and all mentioned aspects will continue to evolve.

> If you're interested, please stay updated on the progress.

Reviewer: Do we have some issues to link here?

Reviewer: OK. I can see them below.
